What Doctors on the Front Lines Wish They’d Known a Month Ago
Ironclad emergency medical practices — about when to use ventilators, for example — have dissolved almost overnight.

Just about a month ago, people stricken with the new coronavirus started to arrive in unending ranks at hospitals in the New York metropolitan area, forming the white-hot center of the pandemic in the United States.

Now, doctors in the region have started sharing on medical grapevines what it has been like to re-engineer, on the fly, their health care systems, their practice of medicine, their personal lives.

Doctors, if you could go back in time, what would you tell yourselves in early March?

“What we thought we knew, we don’t know,” said Dr. Nile Cemalovic, an intensive care physician at Lincoln Medical Center in the Bronx.

Medicine routinely remakes itself, generation by generation. For the disease that drives this pandemic, certain ironclad emergency medical practices have dissolved almost overnight.

The biggest change: Instead of quickly sedating people who had shockingly low levels of oxygen and then putting them on mechanical ventilators, many doctors are now keeping patients conscious, having them roll over in bed, recline in chairs and continue to breathe on their own — with additional oxygen — for as long as possible.

The idea is to get them off their backs and thereby make more lung available. A number of doctors are even trying patients on a special massage mattress designed for pregnant women because it has cutouts that ease the load on the belly and chest.

Other doctors are rejiggering CPAP breathing machines, normally used to help people with sleep apnea, or they have hacked together valves and filters. For some critically ill patients, a ventilator may be the only real hope.

Then there is the space needed inside of buildings and people’s heads. In an instant, soaring atrium lobbies and cafeterias became hospital wards; rarely-used telemedicine technology has suddenly taken off, and doctors are holding virtual bedside conferences with scattered family members; physicians force themselves to peel away psychically and emotionally from fields of battle where the opponent never observes the cease-fire that the rest of society has entered.

More than 12,000 people have died with coronavirus in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York, where there are more than 260,000 confirmed cases. Those numbers almost certainly understate the casualties, officials acknowledge, as testing of both the living and the dead remains spotty.

The New York-area doctors have not uncovered any surefire way to fight Covid-19 — the disease caused by the virus — and not enough time has passed to say if their improvisations will hold up, said Dr. Anand Swaminathan, an assistant clinical professor of emergency medicine at St. Joseph’s University Medical Center in Paterson, N.J.

No one knows if any of the spaghetti will stick to the wall.

“I’m confident that we will have a lot of answers in months,” said Dr. Reuben Strayer, an emergency medicine physician at Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn. “Unfortunately, that doesn’t help us right now. You have to start somewhere.”


Surviving
The medical community is in desperate need of research but there is no time to wait. “Everyone’s got an observation,” Dr. Strayer said. “Everyone’s got an opinion. It’s not very useful. What matters is science and we don’t have any yet.”

After shifts filled entirely with the stress of uncertainty, doctors use their own maps to hunt down peace at day’s end.

“I live alone,” said Dr. Strayer. “That turns out to be a huge advantage for me and my own well-being.”

Dr. Swaminathan said he goes through a decontamination ritual before driving home to his wife and children. “We decided moving out was not an option,” he said. They keep him sane. He has Zoom sessions with friends who work outside of medicine. And there were surprises.

“Someone tweeted the English National Ballet musicians, doing a Zoom session playing Tchaikovsky’s ‘Swan Lake,’” he said. “I listened to it. I noticed my whole body relaxed.”