The pH of water: What to know
In its purest form, water has a pH of 7, which is at the exact center of the pH scale. Particles in the water can change the pH of the water, and most water for use has a pH of somewhere between 6.5 and 8.5.

There are some important things to understand about the pH scale and how it relates to water. For instance, it is possible that drinking alkaline drinks may offer some health benefits.

Keep reading to learn more about the pH of water.


What is pH?
In chemistry, pH is a measurement of the concentration of hydrogen ions in a water-based solution. A lower pH means that there are more hydrogen ions in the liquid, whereas a higher pH indicates fewer hydrogen ions in the liquid.

In simple terms, pH is a scale from 1 to 14 that measures the acidity or alkalinity of a liquid. In the middle of the scale is pure distilled water, with a neutral pH of 7. Anything with a pH below 7 is an acid, and anything with a pH above 7 is an alkali, or base.

To use everyday examples, vinegar is very acidic, with a pH of about 2. Conversely, bleach is highly alkaline, with a pH of about 13.5.

Importantly, this scale only applies to water-based liquids.


How does pH affect water?
pH plays an important role in the properties of a liquid containing water.

For instance, the pH of water may make certain elements in it, such as minerals and metals, more or less available to the body. Heavy metals in water with a lower pH tend to be more toxic, as they are more available to the body. A high pH would make heavy metals less available, and, therefore, less toxic.

The pH may also be a sign of other contaminants or bacterial life in a liquid. In general, a very high or very low pH can make water unusable for certain applications.

For instance, hard water is the common term for water containing a lot of minerals. These minerals make the water very alkaline. As the water passes through pipes and machines that use water, such as dishwashers or showers, these minerals stick to both the pipes and each other, leading to mineral buildup.

Mineral buildup can cause various issues with water in the home, such as making detergents and soaps less effective. It can also lead to reduced water pressure or even blockages.

On the other hand, water with a low pH may corrode metal pipes and extract metal ions into the water, making it harmful to drink or use in the home.

Most of the time, water that providers intend for use or drinking will stay closer to the neutral point of 7, although it may still vary slightly. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recommend keeping the pH between 6.5 and 8.5 in drinking water, and many states in the United States choose to enforce these levels.