The San Diego Zoo received our first jaguar, a male, in 1925. Another male, named Dick, arrived in 1932, and a female joined him in 1939. This pair produced 16 cubs during their time together! Jaguars and their extinct relatives, saber-toothed cats, are an important part of our region’s history.

Some animals attain legendary status because of their beauty or other amazing traits. For more than 21 years, Orson, a black jaguar, became quite a celebrity and drew fans to the Zoo. Some even came weekly to see his tug-of-war matches against his wildlife care team over a shank of meat suspended on a pulley system—of course, Orson always won!

Today, the San Diego Zoo’s Elephant Odyssey habitat, which highlights animals found in our region during the Pleistocene era and relates them to their modern-day counterparts, is home to our jaguars.

Nindiri came to the San Diego Zoo in 2008 from the Brevard Zoo in Florida, where she was named in a contest (Nindiri is a peak off a larger volcano named Masaya, which is her mother’s name). The volcano is described as semi-active, yet Nindiri is anything but that! She is lovingly referred to as a little firecracker. While very small for a jaguar, weighing in at only around 80 pounds (36 kilograms), Nindiri has a feisty personality and can be rather intense. Her keeper likes to say that Nindiri makes up for her small stature with attitude.

In March 2011, male jaguar Guapo, whose name means “handsome” or “good-looking,” moved into our cat complex in Elephant Odyssey. And on April 26, 2012, we welcomed the birth of two cubs, a male named Tikal and a female named Maderas. Tikal, Maderas and Guapo have since moved to other zoos as part of the jaguar breeding program.

In March 2015, Nindiri gave birth to a cub, Valerio. His playful antics as a youngster attracted a lot of added attention to the jaguars. Valerio moved to another zoo in 2017.

Keepers indulge Nindiri’s love for a certain type of enrichment: she pounces on tilapia they shoot into her pool through a special fish injector. She really has fun playing in the water and practicing natural predatory behaviors.