Parental Alienation Is Child Abuse Say Researchers Of Child Development
A family systems approach to parental alienation is recommended, involving victims and perpetrator.
Based on new understandings of how family relationships fundamentally affect child development and wellbeing, three researchers,  Jennifer Jill Harman, Edward Kruk and Denise A Hines are arguing that parental alienation—a deliberate attempt to break a child-parent relationship—should be classified as child abuse. The researchers recommend a family systems response to parental alienation, involving both victims and perpetrator, with a view to restoring all relationships to the child.

Parental alienation facts

Definition of parental alienation:

A child’s reluctance or refusal to have a relationship with a parent for illogical, untrue or exaggerated reasons.
There is a spectrum of parental alienation, from mild to severe. In mild cases, the child may enjoy a good relationship with the target parent provided the alienating parent is not present.
Common symptoms of parental alienation seen in a child:

Open expressions of hostility towards the target parent.
Extreme polarisation – one parent is all good and one parent all bad.
Campaign of denigration of the target parent.
Unfounded rationalisations for their complaints about the target parent.
Borrowed scenarios created by the alienating parent.
Spreading animosity about the target parent to other people.
Lack of overt ambivalence, guilt or remorse for their rejection.
Automatically siding with the alienating parent in any argument or conflict.
Characteristics of alienating behavior by a parent:

Intention to hurt or destroy the other child-parent relationship and to hurt the other parent, while the other parent is motivated to avoid these things. Parental alienation does not include situations where one parent or the child is choosing to end their relationship. It does not include steps by one parent to protect a child from genuine abuse by the other parent.
Enacted over an extended period of time – a pattern of behavior rather than a single action.
Ranging from mild to severe and explicit.
Use of the child as an instrument to hurt the target parent.
Incidence:

Custodial status is the main predictor of who is likely to alienate, rather than gender per se. Non-custodial parents can engage in alienating behavior, but it is rare.
Prevalence is hard to measure because of the absence of an accurate diagnosis.
Parental alienation in the law:

In 2010, Brazil passed a law criminalizing parental alienation on the grounds that is it “moral abuse” – a violation of the child’s fundamental right to have healthy family interactions and family life.
In 2015, the Australian Federal Court recognised parental alienating behaviors as a form of family violence that causes harm to children.
 Parental alienation research:

Over 1,000 books, chapters and research articles on parental alienation published, mostly legal case reviews, expert opinions, clinical case studies and qualitative research studies.
Research on the prevalence, causes, diagnosis and assessment, and treatment outcomes is highly limited.


Parental alienation as child abuse
The researchers highlight aspects of parental alienation that correspond with definitions of child abuse.

Parental alienation as emotional/psychological aggression:

Creating fear in children that the target parent might be dangerous.
Making children feel guilty or ridiculing them for showing warmth or loyalty to the target parent and their extended family.
Withdrawing love and affection when children talk about the other parent.
Interrogating children after visits to the other parent and/or forcing them to throw away any clothing, gifts or reminders of the other parent.
Corrupting children’s identity by telling them the other parent is disappearing from their life – e.g., introducing a step-parent as a replacement, changing the children’s surname.
Presenting false information to children – e.g., distorting their memories of the parent with false and negative details, pretending that the other parent failed to turn up to see the children at a scheduled time.
Forcing children to make binary decisions – e.g., telling them they can see only one parent, not both.
Using children to spy in the home of the other parent.
Holding children responsible for violations of court orders.
Parental alienation as child neglect:

Placing the needs of the alienating parent before the children’s need to be loved and cared for by the other parent.
Being emotionally unavailable to children through parents’ own psychological pathologies.
Making false allegations of abuse and fabricating illness in an attempt to get custody of children and prevent contact with the other parent.
Giving false medication information to the other parent to justify sole care of children’s medical needs.
Using professionals to “help” children cope with the alleged behaviors of the other parent. Some alienating parents work through one professional after another as each starts to suspect what is really happening.
Isolating children from peers who may question their rejection of the other parent.
Parental alienation as local and administrative aggression:

Making false allegations of abuse against the other parent to authorities and services. Sometimes children are co-opted into this process.
Parental alienation as physical and sexual aggression:

Hitting children when they express a desire to be connected with the other parent.
Preventing the other parent from protecting the children against a new partner with a history of sexual or violent offences.