Being a Mother: An Important Role of a Woman
Here’s an inspiring speech shared by Nora Avarientos, Former Executive Director of World Vision Development Foundation during PCEC Women’s Commission Grand Rally last April 28, 2017.

The pivotal role of being a mother is still the divine mission assigned to women alone. From a classic poem written by William Ross Wallace entitled ‘What Rules the World’, he said that the hand that rocks the cradle is the hand that rules the world. It illustrates the influence a mother plays to her child and in the long run to the society; that as a mother strives to nurture and teach a child, she explicitly makes the world a much better place. Women are actually given an opportunity and a privilege by God to be His partner in giving life to another human being.

A Jewish proverb rightly affirms what most of us have experienced: “A mother understands what a child does not say.” Indeed there exist a dynamic between mother and children. Mothers can hear sentences in the silences of their children. God has given mothers the special gift of intuition because it gives her a strong sense of what is right for her children, what they are good at, how they may excel in the future what gifts and abilities she needs to make sure are developed in their lives as God intended.

The Book of T.D. Jakes, “Mother Made the Difference”, provides several roles that mothers generally perform that shape the life of a child to become a contributing member of the society.

Mothers are timeless teachers in the classroom of life . Women especially mothers are the most influential educators. They bequeath to us timeless wisdom, a legacy so precious and valuable. Mothers have often shaped our world from the cradle, by rocking, nurturing and instructing children to grow up to make life changing and history- making accomplishments. For every person, there is a mother behind who fostered her child’s sensibilities to their full potential.

Mothers remain some of our most powerful teachers in the hands-on laboratory of everyday living. Of all their many attributes…all that comes down to is the heart – a mother’s heart. It has everything to do with the tenderness and toughness, the compassion and conscientiousness of the heart. There is nothing quite comforting as having our mother’s arm wrapped around us when we are sad, lonely, or afraid.

Mothers teach us to believe in God. Mothers teach us the value of God’s word through their lives, personal prayer life and dependence on God’s strength and wisdom. Nothing is as attractive in a woman as the fear of the Lord. Knowing God, honouring God and worshipping God are really the most praiseworthy endeavours a person can ever undertake. Mothers are one of the first indications of the sovereignty of God in our lives.

Mothers teach us to have confidence and belief in ourselves. Mothers knew from experience how important for people to believe in themselves in order for children to be whole, strong and grow with a healthy estimation of oneself. One way of parents to breed confidence in a child is to affirm and sharpen his/her thinking. A healthy sense of self-confidence can result in a person to achieve more and celebrate more. Mother’s lessons in life gives us the space to believe in oneself as there is no limit to greatness one can attain or the great things you can accomplish.

Mothers teach us the power of words. The words that mothers speak have power. Words can build up a child or tear him down.

How are we shaping our children as we speak to them? Are you like a potter, shaping the soft clay of your children’s hearts with words with a light guiding hand at some times and with a gentle pressure at others? Or are you a sculptor, using your words like hammers, chisels, and knives because you are too busy and stressed to speak kindly and exercise patience?

When your children finish a conversation with you, do they look like fine pottery in the process of being molded by your words with love and care or do they look like stone, having had parts of their hearts chipped away by negative, sharp or angry words.

Be very careful with what we say. Remember that death and life, blessings and cursing are in the power of our tongue. With the words of our mouth, we can impart greatness or smallness in someone else’s life. You and I can fan the flame of a dream or you and I can snuff it out. Let us use our words for good.

Mothers teach us to pray. Prayer is taught by example. It is lived and it is a legacy that is passed on to our children. A woman who can talk to God and hear from Him is a force of strengths and beauty like no other.
“An ounce of mother is worth a pound of priest”, an old Spanish saying. A mother’s prayers are a priceless gift, a real treasure, an earnest heartfelt force of power. If you have a mother who prays for you, you are indeed truly blessed.

Mothers teach us to live out our legacy. Scripture is certainly consistent about reminding us that we will reap what we sow, and for many of us, our mothers – the greatest women in our lives sowed beautiful seeds of truth, wisdom, joy and peace, a spiritual harvest that is now bearing fruit in us and our children. Mothers have always made a difference and will continue to do so.

Mothers have often shaped our world from the cradle by rocking, nurturing and instructing children who grow up to make life-changing and history making accomplishments. For every preacher, president, volunteer worker, employee, fashionista, technician, community worker, doctor , caregiver among others, there is a mother behind them who fostered her child to reach his/her full potential.