What is a Registered Nurse?
Before delving into occupational specifics, let’s start with a general definition of a registered nurse.

A registered nurse (RN) is a nurse who holds a nursing diploma or Associate Degree in Nursing (ADN), has passed the NCLEX-RN exam administered by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) and has met all the other licensing requirements mandated by their state’s board of nursing.

Though a nursing diploma or ADN meets minimum education requirements, a growing number of educators, health care agencies, employers, professional associations, and medical community members encourage RNs to pursue a Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN), either as a path to initial licensure or as a way to expand their expertise after becoming licensed.

Luckily, colleges and universities are working to develop more creative, nontraditional degree pathways for students and nurses alike to earn a BSN:

RN to BSN post-licensure programs help RNs that already hold an ADN or diploma earn a BSN in just one to two years.
Accelerated BSN pre-licensure programs help career changers with college degrees in other fields become RNs by fast-racking them toward the completion of a BSN in just 12 to 18 months.
Let’s talk numbers. According to the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, the number of professionally active RNs in the United States reached nearly 3.2 million in September 2016. During that same period there were just 926,000 active physicians.

So, what are these numbers telling us?

The fact that there are more than three times more RNs than doctors staffing hospitals and clinics provides a reminder of just how much the healthcare system relies on registered nurses and how badly patients need RNs to provide care. Think of RNs as the backbone of the healthcare system in American; without them the entire structure would collapse.


Registered Nurse Scope of Practice
Although a textbook definition of a registered nurse may be helpful, it does little to describe any occupational function. The truly defining nature of a registered nurse lies in the scope of practice …

The term “scope of practice” is an expression used to indicate a set group of services and procedures an RN is qualified to perform or not perform
Every state has its own board of nursing (BON) which is the authoritative body that governs the standards and scope of practice for RN’s and their licensing requirements
Since each BON determines its own scope of practice, the scope differs slightly depending on which state an RN is licensed in.
Still, the RN scope of practice is pretty consistent from state to state …

Every RN, regardless of their state of residency, must pass the NCLEX-RN exam.
This across-the-board requirement means that the NCLEX-RN exam is the best assessment available to properly gauge a RN’s ability to perform a generally agreed upon scope of practice.
According to the National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN), an RN’s scope of practice includes:

Management of Care
Safety and Infection Control
Health Promotion and Maintenance
Psychosocial Integrity
Basic Care and Comfort
Pharmacological and Parenteral Therapies
Reduction of Risk Potential
Physiological Adaption


Typical RN Duties Within the Scope of Practice
Of course, not all RNs perform the same duties because their responsibilities often depend on several factors such as work setting, training, education, experience, and specialty. However, there are many tasks that fall under an RN’s basic scope of practice and that are universal for all RNs:

Preparing patients for exams or treatments and making assessments, including helping to perform diagnostic tests and analyzing results
Recording patients’ medical histories and symptoms, including observations, health promotion recommendations, and methods of disease prevention
Administering medicine and treatments to patients
Helping to establish plans of care for patients
Operating and monitoring medical equipment
Teaching patients and their families how to manage medical conditions and post-treatment care
Conferring and collaborating with supervising physicians and additional healthcare professionals
The Nursing Process

At the core of all registered nursing practice is the delivery of holistic, patient-focused care, according to the American Nurses Association. Delivering this care is a five-step process:

Assessing the needs of a patient, not only physically but also based on psychological, sociocultural, spiritual, economic, and lifestyle factors
Using clinical judgment to diagnose the needs of the patient
Establishing a care plan for the patient by setting measurable and achievable short- and long-term goals for the patient based on the assessment and diagnosis
Implementing nursing care according to the care plan
Evaluating the patient’s status and the effectiveness of the nursing care
The nurse also carefully documents all these steps so that other health care providers have access to the information.