The nurse who changed my life
'A beacon of hope:' Saying 'thanks' to the nurses in hospitals and homes across the country.

Hero. Beacon of hope. Angel. Source of calm. Heart of gold.
These are just some of the words people used to describe the nurses
who have touched their lives in extraordinary ways.
In honor of National Nurses Week, TODAY asked people to share their
stories of nurses on the front lines of COVID-19 and beyond.


Nurse: Tammi Knight
IU Saxony Health, Fishers, IN

“We have a close-knit friend group of nine people.
Tammi is part of the glue of this group. Even though she has been working long, exhausting hours, she has still taken time to check on the group ... Sending funny memes to brighten our day, and offer words of encouragement as we all find a new normal … Tammi has been doing double duty: Giving at work and being solid for our friend group.”

Stanley Abell


Nurse: Rebecca Diago Bacalan

Mount Sinai West, New York, NY

“My mother has been an ICU nurse for the past 30 years. As an immigrant from the Philippines, she came to New York straight out of nursing school to better her life and start her career. She has devoted the past 30 years of her life by putting her patients first. She goes into every shift with dedication, love and compassion … With only one month left until her retirement, and recently recovering from COVID-19 herself, she is giving it her all by still going into every single shift with the same compassion and dedication no matter how exhausted she is.”

Melissa Bacalan


Nurse: Pairploy Limpraphanonta
NYC Health & Hospitals/Harlem, New York, NY

“Ploy has been a beacon of hope for her fellow nurses
and doctors during this pandemic … Ploy was able to obtain donations of PPE to keep us protected, donations from restaurants to ensure we had a meal to eat during our 12-hour shifts, sharing letters from the community and using social media to provide messages protecting our patients. Ploy is our HERO, without her we would not be as strong and resilient as we all are eight weeks later into this crisis. Ploy is most deserving of this honor and this would be a fitting way to express my thanks for all that she has done and continues to do.”

Dr. Alexie Puran