Lebanon, Mired in Crises, Turns to a Professor as Prime Minister
Hassan Diab, chosen by the president to form a new government, vowed to work swiftly to slow the country’s collapse.
By Ben Hubbard and Hwaida Saad

BEIRUT, Lebanon — Lebanon’s president appointed a little-known professor and former education minister to form a new government as prime minister on Thursday in the midst of street protests and a financial crisis that have left the country reeling.

The appointee, Hassan Diab, vowed to swiftly form a new government to “focus on stopping the collapse and restoring confidence.”

But he faces an uphill battle on multiple fronts.

Since October, protesters across the country have taken over city squares and blocked main roads in anger over years of corruption and poor governance. That has exacerbated a long-building financial crisis in Lebanon, one of the world’s most indebted countries.

Lebanon has been overseen by a caretaker government since Prime Minister Saad Hariri resigned in the face of mass protests on Oct. 29.

It appeared unlikely that the appointment of Mr. Diab, a 60-year-old professor at the American University of Beirut, would quell the protests, and it was unclear whether he could take swift steps to slow the country’s collapse.

After other candidates failed to get the necessary parliamentary support, President Michel Aoun named Mr. Diab to form a government on Thursday after he won the support of 69 members of the country’s 128-member Parliament — a simple majority.

In Lebanon’s sect-based political system, the prime minister must be a Sunni Muslim, and Mr. Diab’s appointment was unique in that his backing came not from fellow Sunnis but from Christian and Shiite parties. The latter includes Hezbollah, the militant group that the United States and other countries have designated a terrorist organization.

That could hamper Mr. Diab’s ability to form a representative cabinet. It could also complicate a new government’s efforts to unlock international assistance, if Mr. Diab is even able to build one. Western countries such as France and the United States, which have supported Lebanon in the past, have hesitated to give aid this time, saying it would be conditioned on political reforms.

Some analysts doubted that Mr. Diab’s appointment would be enough to address the country’s simultaneous crises, questioning the qualifications he brought to the difficult job.

“You need someone with integrity and vision, someone who understands that Lebanon is at a key juncture both politically and financially — and how are you going to deal with that?” said Sami Atallah, the director of the Lebanese Center for Policy Studies. “You need a skilled team to work on all these issues, and I don’t get a sense that he will be the person who will pull it off.”

Late Thursday, protesters gathered at Martyrs’ Square in downtown Beirut to oppose Mr. Diab’s nomination. The protest movement has remained largely leaderless while presenting demands that range from the formation of a government of experts to the ouster of the country’s entire political elite.

“Lebanon is passing through a harsh, difficult economic crisis, and Diab doesn’t have the magic wand to solve it,” said Ihab Hassan, a protester. “The new prime minister is going to form the same government based on sharing among sects, and this is what we’ve been demonstrating against for weeks.”